# KEspectrum-SWOT
## About 
This repo aims to share submesoscale permitting (or higher resolution) simulations that allow  the analysis of the temporal variability of the geostrophic kinetic energy (KE) spectrum  over several oceanic regions and compare with satellite altimetry SWOT dataset.

## Motivation
Satellite altimetry launches during the last two decades marked a significant advance for oceanographic science through sea level observations in a spatial range from 100 km to over 5,000 km. The geostrophic velocities estimated from SSH allowed  us to describe the kinetic energy contained in the mesoscale.  To describe the spatial and temporal variability of kinetic energy (KE) in the ocean, KE spectra have been extensively employed.  Depending of the processes that drive the dynamics, the KE spectrum slope varies (REF). In situ observations, satellite data, and numerical ocean models show the presence of a significant temporal and regional variability in the distribution of KE (REF. 

Recent studies have shown that submesoscale currents can distribute the KE between spatial scales by re-energizing or removing mesoscale energy.  In addition, it has been mentioned that submesoscale processes have significant seasonal variability, with winter being the more active season. These suggestions have been proposed using in situ observation and numerical simulation, but not with satellite altimetry due to the resolution limitation

Neverthless, in 2021 a new generation of satellite altimetry  SWOT was launched. SWOT has a resolution (around X) including  part of the submesoscale dynamic and currently there are 18 month of data available. This dataset  offer the opportunity to describe the temporal and spatial variability geostrophic KE spectrum at scale that it has not describe by previous satellite altimetry.

The objective of this study is to describe the seasonal variability KE spectrum from SWOT and compare with submesoscale permitting/resolving simulation over several oceanic regions. 


BASURA

The launch of satellite altimetry SWOT and its available of 18-month data  This repo aims to share submesoscale  permitting simulations that allow  the estimation of KE spectrum  and compare the seasonal variability of the SWOT 

On one hand, the ageostrophy currents generated by these processes can interact with geostrophy currents, transferring KE to small cascade (REF). On the other hand, submesoscale motions may also contribute to mesoscale re-energization, e.g., through absorption of mixed layer eddies (MLEs) (Qiu et al., 2014; Schubert et al., 2020, 2023).  Previous studies mentioned that submesoscale processes have a significant seasonal variability, being winter the more active season.




Submesoscale processes have an important role in  energy budget over the ocean. Recent studies have been shown that submesoscale currents can distribute the KE between spatial scales. On one hand, the ageostrophy currents generated by these processes can interact with geostrophy currents, transferring KE to small cascade (REF). On the other hand, submesoscale motions may also contribute to mesoscale re-energization, e.g., through absorption of mixed layer eddies (MLEs) (Qiu et al., 2014; Schubert et al., 2020, 2023).  Previous studies mentioned that submesoscale processes have a significant seasonal variability, being winter the more active season.

KE spectral from satellite altimetry do not  reproduces submesoscale scales. At mesoscale, satellite altimetry show discrepancy with submesoscale permitting resolutions models (REF). For example, it has been observed that AVISO data miss a substantial part of the mesoscale eddy energy, which extends to a lower scale than that expected from geostrophic turbulence. The excess energy appears to be associated with underestimated energy at submesoscale, in particular by absorption of mixed layer eddies (MLEs), as mentioned previosly.



## Schedule
* February - April: Reception simulations
* May - August : Processing data
* September - October : Redaction manuscrit
* November: Revision
* December: Submit
  
## How to contribute

### Data Request
* Spatial resolution: < 4 km
* Period: 18 months (+ 6 extra)
* Regions: Gulf Stream, Aguhlas Current, Kuroshio Current, California Current, South Pacific (define area size)
* Variables:
  1) Daily output
  2) Surface variable: SSH
  3) depth < 1000 m: Temp, Sal, W, U, V

* Grid file is request
